---
id: codec
title: Codec
sidebar_label: Codec
---

> code reference: https://github.com/iov-one/blog-tutorial/blob/master/x/blog/codec.proto

Weave defines `Marshaller` and `Persistent` interface standards. These interfaces are automatically implemented by any code autogenerated by protoc from protobuf files, and we recommend using .proto files to specify the serialization format for any persistent data in our application (internal state as well as transactions and messages). However, if you have never worked with protobuf, this might be a bit of a challenge, so here we explain a workflow that we use in Weave-based projects.

## Create Codec file

First imagine the shape of your classes. The product of your imagination will be called `Codec`. And the language of expressing the shape of the classes is: [proto3](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/proto3). There are several different `int encodings`, `byte slices`, `strings`, and nested structures; and fields may be repeated. So it is best to forget complex types with methods and instead focus on the actual data structure.

Codec is the first component that needs to be designed. Keep in mind that this part is the most important as the whole module will depend on _codec_. Codec resembles _model_ in MVC pattern; however. codec not only defines the model representation but also marshalling/unmarshalling and interactions with messages. Codec defines the whole application state models and more. In this article, we will not go as far as explaining every proto message - one example for each message and state should be enough. I advise you open our [blog tutorial application](https://orkunkl.github.com/iov-one/blog-tutorial/blob/master/x/blog/codec.proto) to the side and follow the codec as we move forward with this tutorial.

## State

In the previous section, we explained how to define your domain attributes and models. Here `Blog` is defined as proto message. The [x/codec.proto](https://orkunkl.github.com/iov-one/blog-tutorial/blob/master/x/blog/codec.proto#L22-L34) file defines the `Blog` type rather simply, once you remove the comments, this is all that is left:

```protobuf
message Blog {
  weave.Metadata metadata = 1;
  // ID is blog's identifier
  bytes id = 2 [(gogoproto.customname) = "ID"];
  // Owner is the owner address if the blog
  bytes owner = 3 [(gogoproto.casttype) = "github.com/iov-one/weave.Address"];
  // Title is title of the blog
  string title = 4;
  // Description is description section of the blog
  string description = 5;
  // CreatedAt defines creation time of the blog
  int64 created_at = 6 [(gogoproto.casttype) = "github.com/iov-one/weave.UnixTime"];
}
```

<!---
TODO refactor here when bucket is merged
-->

As you can see above, Weave is heavily using `bytes` for identities, addresses, etc. At first glance, this might seem difficult to handle but it is just a matter of familiarity. Note that the package defined in the protobuf file must match the package name used by the Go language code in the same directory.

You can also import types from one proto file into another. Make sure to use the full Github path so that the generated Go code has properly set imports. The package name above is also used as a namespace for the imported protobuf definitions. This is how [x/cash](https://github.com/iov-one/weave/blob/master/x/cash/codec.proto) creates a wallet that contains an array of tokens of different currencies.

Two critical points needs to be explained in state models and messages. You must have noticed the first one:

```protobuf
weave.Metadata metadata = 1;
```

`weave.Metadata` enables upgrading the code on chain without downtime. It is required if you want to use any [IOV-provided extensions](https://github.com/iov-one/weave/tree/master/x). [Migrations](https://github.com/iov-one/weave/tree/v0.21.0/migration) package will be explained in more detail in further sections.

Secondly, note how the magic `ID` field works. This will be explained in [Models](weave/tutorial/04-models.md) section.

## Message

Here is a sample message that creates an article.

```protobuf
message CreateArticle {
  weave.Metadata metadata = 1;
  bytes blog_id = 2 [(gogoproto.customname) = "BlogID"];
  string title = 3;
  string content = 4;
  int64 delete_at = 5 [(gogoproto.casttype) = "github.com/iov-one/weave.UnixTime"];
}
```

## Using Weave inbuilt types in codec

Noticed `(gogoproto.casttype)` and `(gogoproto.customname)`?

These are [gogoprotobuf](https://github.com/gogo/protobuf/blob/master/extensions.md#more-canonical-go-structures) field extensions that make go code and protobuf more interop and cleaner

### Cast Type

`(gogoproto.casttype)` changes the generated field type. It assumes that this type is castable to the original goprotobuf field type.

```protobuf
int64 delete_at = 5 [(gogoproto.casttype) = "github.com/iov-one/weave.UnixTime"];
```

`(gogoproto.casttype)` indicates this field will be cast to `weave.UnixTime` which is a wrapper around [golang/time](https://godoc.org/time) with necessary. Compiled codec.pb.go field:

```go
DeleteAt github_com_iov_one_weave.UnixTime `protobuf:"varint,5,opt,name=delete_at,json=deleteAt,proto3,casttype=github.com/iov-one/weave.UnixTime" json:"delete_at,omitempty"`
```

One more useful Weave cast type is `weave.Address`:

```protobuf
bytes owner = 3 [(gogoproto.casttype) = "github.com/iov-one/weave.Address"];
```

This generates the field owner as `weave.Address`. This relieves us of the burden of converting protobuf-generated byte typed field to `weave.Address`.

### Custom Name

`(gogoproto.customname)` changes the generated fieldname. This is especially useful when generated methods conflict with fieldnames or specify generated names to be compatible with the existing code.

```protobuf
bytes blog_id = 2 [(gogoproto.customname) = "BlogID"];
```

`(gogoproto.customname)` indicates this field will be named as `BlogID`. Compiled codec.pb.go field:

```go
BlogID []byte `protobuf:"bytes,2,opt,name=blog_id,json=blogId,proto3" json:"blog_id,omitempty"`
```

Without the `(gogoproto.customname)` tag, protoc would produce this code which does not follow the convention:

```go
BlogId []byte `protobuf:"bytes,2,opt,name=blog_id,json=blogId,proto3" json:"blog_id,omitempty"`
```

As you can see above, we defined necessary fields that will be used by `handler` to interact with application state.

## Compiling Proto Files

To compile protobuf files, you need to have the [protoc](https://github.com/google/protobuf#protocol-compiler-installation) binary installed and a language-specific translator (gogo-protobuf in this case). This can be a bit of a pain, especially the first time, so the default **weave-starter-kit** [Makefile](https://github.com/iov-one/weave-starter-kit/blob/master/Makefile) contains helpers for you.
